---
layout: post
title: "How to get in to UW CS: all my stats and essays"
date: Feb 26, 2020
---

When I applied to colleges, and again when I applied to CS, I didn't like that
there weren't good examples of what to do and what not to do on your
application. After my fourth application was finally successful, I wanted to
release my information so that others can reference it when applying.

<ins>This post was originally made on Reddit ([see the Reddit
version](https://www.reddit.com/r/udub/comments/f9s27t/how_to_get_in_to_uw_cs_all_my_stats_and_essays/)),
using Google Drive to host the files.  I've decided to copy it to my site now
that it's up to date. All the content is the same, but the files are hosted
here. Changes are underlined like this.</ins>

# Documents

I created a ~~Google Drive~~ [folder with all of the documents]({{ site.url
}}/unlisted/how-to-get-in-to-uw-cs/files) I have related to my numerous
applications. Essays, my transcript, etc.

You have to have a UW google account to view it, for now. If you don't but still
want access, message me.
# My timeline

## High school
I am a male, half white half asian sophomore from a pretty good high school in
California. I didn't have stellar grades, but I feel like I am capable of being
a good student. However, due to my grades, none of the colleges with excellent
CS programs (MIT, Stanford, etc.) would accept me. I applied for CS direct
admission at UW, but obviously didn't get it (because out of state DAs are
rare). I decided to come here anyway, because I knew I could still apply to the
CS program after matriculating.

## Freshman year
My high school offered a lot of AP credit, so I was able to jump the gun and
apply for spring admission as a freshman (after one quarter at UW). At this
point I had taken CSE 143 (3.8) ENGL 121 (4.0) and MATH 126 (3.8). I was
rejected. Since the UW CSE advisors give feedback on applications, I went and
asked them what the deal was. They explained that they pretty much don't admit
first quarter freshman, but that I was on the right path (good grades, some
extracurriculars, etc.), and should apply again at the end of the year.

I spent the next two quarters taking random classes that looked interesting,
because I have enough AP credit that I don't really need to fulfill a lot of
requirements. The only STEM class I took was MATH 308 (3.6) in winter. I talked
to the advising department in spring, and they told me that I wasn't likely to
get in because they had no proof that I could be academically successful in STEM
classes, beyond what they saw last time. It was too late for me to change
anything, though so I just hoped for the best. Over the summer I applied again
and was rejected. I was in California, so I didn't get to talk to the advisors
immediately.

## Sophomore year
I returned to campus a bit more nervous than before, because the CS department
had already turned me down three times (DA, Spring, Fall). I went to advising
and asked them what they needed from me. I told them that I planned on taking
CSE 414, MATH 307, INFO 201, and Persian 101 fall quarter, to show that I could
handle a heavy STEM load. They seemed to think that INFO 201 was not a STEM
class, but said that I was definitely taking an "academically rigorous"
schedule. Mid quarter, I went back to advising, and told them that I expected to
earn good (3.8 and above) grades in all my classes except maybe Persian, and
they told me that that was great. I listed my extracurriculars (pretty much just
volunteering for a club, working on a database web app, which I had been doing
since freshman year, and a non-CS summer internship) and they said very clearly
that I wasn't doing enough outside of class, and wasn't likely to be admitted. I
then got kinda salty and still haven't talked to the advisors since. That
obviously rattled me, so I started my search for extracurriculars anew. I
started working with a family friend's CS startup a few weeks later.

When I applied for Spring 2020, I was finally admitted. I believe that there
were two major factors that led to my admission.
    1. A proven academic record in STEM classes
    2. An essay that clearly enumerated how my extracurriculars provided useful
       professional skills and were relevant to my success in the program

# Tips

I spent a lot of time in the advising office, and they have slowly given me some
helpful information that I collected here.

* __Talk to the advisors__. They will answer questions that college admissions
  counselors won't, like how many people they predict will apply, where
  specifically your application was lacking, what notes they have on file for
  your essay (what their takeaways were), etc. Be prepared with some questions
  and take notes.
* Learn from others' examples. In my Spring 2020 application, I drew essay style
  inspiration from the essay a friend of mine wrote after he got in for Fall
  2019.
* Your essay is important. They don't seem to care much for storytelling
  prowess, but seem to respond well to direct claims about yourself and your
  skills/experience/whatever.
* Take STEM classes and do well in them. The department seems to use Math (I
  never took physics/chem/etc. here, but maybe those too) as a proxy for ability
  to handle a CS course load.
* I have a hypothesis that the program is looking for students who are going to
  be able to succeed in a professional setting, so they emphasize leadership,
  communication, etc. in the application because they can't teach those in
  class. Learn them yourself and prove it with your writing.

# Conclusion

Hopefully this post is helpful. I have always seen the CS application at UW as a
second chance to prove myself after my college application cycle didn't go so
well. You get multiple tries and good feedback. Take advantage of it. If you've
read this far, good luck next quarter. If you have questions or want to make
friends or whatever ~~my snapchat is `ericbanisadr`~~ <ins>email me or something,
I've since deleted my snapchat</ins>. Please don't post my stuff elsewhere without
telling me.

